---
layout: post
title: Jekyll basics
tags: References
time: Jul 16, 2021
---

_Greatly inspired by
[Mike Dane's Jekyll Tutorial](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLLAZ4kZ9dFpOPV5C5Ay0pHaa0RJFhcmcB),
the official Jekyll documentation, and miscellaneous stack overflow
submissions._

- [Installation](#installation)
- [Create blog](#create-blog)
- [File structure](#file-structure)
- [Front matter](#front-matter)
- [Writing posts](#writing-posts)
- [Writing drafts](#writing-drafts)
- [Creating pages](#creating-pages)
- [Serve on Github pages](#serve-on-github-pages)
- [Permalinks](#permalinks)
- [Front matter defaults](#front-matter-defaults)

### Installation

Check for ruby and ruby gems installation.

```
$ ruby --version
$ gem --version
```

To allow a
[non-sudo install of Jekyll](https://jekyllrb.com/docs/troubleshooting/#no-sudo),
add the following to the `.bashrc` or equivalent. This tells `gem` to place its
gems within the user home folder, not in the system-wide location.

```bash
# The specific folder is not significant
export GEM_HOME=$HOME/gems
export PATH=$HOME/gems/bin:$PATH
```

Install Jekyll and check for installation.

```
$ gem install jekyll bundler
$ jekyll -v
```

If there is an error:

```
RDoc is not a full Ruby parser and will fail when fed invalid ruby programs.
```

Then install rdoc with:

```
gem install rdoc
```

### Serve locally

Create a new blog and serve the website in `localhost`. Reload the browser tab
to see changes, or add the `--livereload` flag to do this automatically. Add the
`--drafts` flag to view drafts.

```
$ jekyll new blog-name
$ cd blog-name
$ bundle install
$ bundle exec jekyll serve --livereload --drafts
```

### File structure

`_posts`: Folder where all the blog posts are stored. The folder structure
inside is ignored, so any organisation approach can used.

`_site`: Folder where final output of the website is stored. It holds all the
files ready for production. It automatically gets updated and should generally
not be modified manually.

`_config.yaml`: File that contains settings and variables for the blog.

`Gemfile`: File that stores all the Ruby dependencies.

### Front matter

Front matter is essentially meta data about the post. It can be written in
either `yaml` or `json`. The website uses the front matter to display certain
details about each post, such as the title and the url/path. There are other
front matter attributes available.

```yaml
layout: post
title: "Welcome to Jekyll!"
date: 2021-07-16
categories: jekyll update
```

### Writing posts

The filename of a post must be in the format:

```
YYYY-MM-DD-title.md
```

The filename determines the path of the post, but this setting can be changed.
The front matter overrides most of the meta data about the post. Posts can be
added in subdirectories of any organisation.

### Writing drafts

Drafts are written in the `_drafts` folder. The filename of a draft can be of
any format, and is not displayed or rendered on the production website. To serve
the draft posts:

```
bundle exec jekyll serve --draft
```

### Creating pages

Pages are not posts. To create a page, create a `.md` file in any directory that
is not the `_posts` directory with any filename format. The front matter must
include `layout: page`.

To access the page, add the file path to the url, or find the link in the
header.

```
localhost:4000/about
```

### Permalinks

A permalink is a permanent url. Changing a variable in the front matter may
break the url. To add a permalink, add a permalink attribute. Variables such as
the title, category, year, month, day, and others, can also be used in the
permalink.

```
permalink: /:year/mypermalink.anything
```

### Front matter defaults

Create default front matter in the `_config.yaml` file. The `localhost` server
must be restarted when editing the configuration file.

```yaml
defaults:
  - scope: # apply to these files
      path: "_posts"
    values: # apply these attributes to the files in scope
      permalink: /:title
```

### Serve on Github pages

<small>[Source](https://docs.github.com/en/pages/setting-up-a-github-pages-site-with-jekyll/creating-a-github-pages-site-with-jekyll).</small>

1. Create a Github repository and push all the files.

2. Github pages may depend on an older version of Jekyll. If so, it therefore
   must be downgraded:

   1. Downgrade the Jekyll version by changing the version in the `Gemfile`. The
      latest supported version is located
      [here](https://pages.github.com/versions/).

   2. Delete the file `Gemfile.lock`. This is so the current version is not
      specified anymore when installing again.

   3. `$ bundle install` to reinstall Jekyll with the desired version and
      restore the file `Gemfile.lock`.

3. Comment out:

   ```ruby
   gem "jekyll", "~> <VERSION>"
   ```

4. Uncomment and update the Github pages line to the following, where
   `GITHUB-PAGES-VERSION` is the latest supported version.

   ```ruby
   gem "github-pages", "~> GITHUB-PAGES-VERSION", group: :jekyll_plugins
   ```

5. Now `$ bundle update` to update with the `github-pages` gem.

6. Add the repository name to the baseurl in `_config.yml`:

   ```yaml
   baseurl: /<repository-name>
   ```

7. Finally, in the Github repository, configure the Github pages settings and
   push all changes to the repository.
